"THE GREAT ENERGY PREDICTOR SHOOTOUT" - THE FIRST BUILDING DATA ANALYSIS 
AND PREDICTION COMPETITION
Concept and Summary
ASHRAE Meeting
Denver, Colorado
June, 1993
Co-chaired by Jan F. Kreider and Jeff S. Haberl


Active Period:  December 1, 1992 -  April 30, 1993
INTRODUCTION
A wide range of new techniques is now being applied to the  analysis problems involved with 
predicting the future behavior of HVAC systems and deducing properties of these systems. 
Similar problems arise in  most observational disciplines, including physics, biology, and 
economics.  New  tools, such as genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, the use of 
connectionist models for forecasting and tree-based classifiers or the extraction of 
parameters of nonlinear systems with time-delay embedding, promise to provide results that 
are unobtainable with more traditional techniques. Unfortunately, the realization and 
evaluation of this  promise has been hampered by the difficulty of making rigorous 
comparisons  between competing techniques, particularly ones that come from different  
disciplines.  The prediction of energy usage by HVAC systems is important for purposes of 
HVAC diagnostics, system control, optimization and energy management.
In order to facilitate such comparisons and to foster contact among the relevant disciplines, 
ASHRAE's TC4.7 and TC 1.5 have organized a building data analysis and prediction competition 
in the form of an ASHRAE seminar to be held in Denver in June, 1993. Forecasting or 
prediction using empirical models will be the goal of the competition. (Neither system 
characterization, system identification nor simulation code validation [e.g., DOE-2 or BLAST] 
are the subject of this seminar; they will be addressed in a future session.) Two carefully 
chosen  sets of energy and environmental data from real buildings will be made available to 
the contestants.  Each contestant will be required to prepare  quantitative analyses of these 
data and submit them to the seminar co-chairs prior to the ASHRAE seminar.  Those with the 
best results will be asked to make a presentation to the seminar.
At the close of the competition the performance of the techniques  submitted will be compared 
and published.  If there is sufficient interest, a server accessible by modem may be set up 
to operate as an on-line archive of interesting data sets, programs, and comparisons among 
algorithms in the future.  There will be no monetary prizes. An ASHRAE symposium has been 
scheduled for the Winter 1994 ASHRAE meeting in New Orleans to explore the results of the 
competition in formal papers.
The competition does not require advanced registration; to enter, simply request the data 
(there is no charge for the data diskette) along with support information and submit your 
analysis on time. The detailed description of the competition and instructions for acquiring 
the data and entering  the competition are given below.
ACCESSING THE DATA
The data are available on disks (5.25-in size) in ASCII, IBM-PC format. To


receive the data, send a self-addressed 9 x 12 in. envelope, with a $2.90 priority 
mail stamp affixed, to:
	Building Energy Predictor Shootout
	Joint Center for Energy Management
	Campus Box 428


	University of Colorado
	Boulder, CO  80309-0428
Instructions on submitting a return disk with the analysis of the data will be included in 
a README file on the data disk.  The disk will also include an entry form that each entrant 
will need to complete and submit along with the results.
FOR MORE INFORMATION
Further questions about the competition should be directed to either of the organizers:
	Professor Jan F. Kreider, Director	Professor Jeff S. Haberl


	Joint Center for Energy Management	Department of Mechanical
	Engineering
	Campus Box 428	Texas A&M University
	University of Colorado	College Station, TX  77843-3123
	Boulder, CO  80309-0428	Phone:  409-845-1560


	Phone:  303-492-3915	Fax:  409-862-2762
	Fax:  303-492-7317	E-mail:  JSH4037@TAMSIGMA (Bitnet)
	E-mail:  JKREIDER@VAXF.COLORADO.EDU
Detailed instructions and data set descriptions are included in the attached document.
[PB]
INSTRUCTIONS - "The Great Energy Predictor Shootout"
Contents
	I.	Philosophy
	II.	General Information
	III.	Acquiring and Submitting Data
	IV.	Data Sets


	V.	Submittals
	VI.	Other Matters
1.1  Philosophy
This competition has been organized to help clarify the conflicting claims among many 
researchers who use and analyze building energy data and to foster contact among these 
persons and their institutions. The intent is not necessarily only to declare winners but 
rather to set up a format in which rigorous evaluations of techniques can be made. Because 
there are natural measures of performance, a rank-ordering will be given. In all  cases, 
however, the  goal is to collect and analyze quantitative results in order to understand 
similarities and differences among the approaches.


1.2   General Information
Overview
This section contains the instructions on how to participate in the competition.
Data: Two distinct data sets are provided for prediction.  Contestants will be given these two 
sets of independent variables with the corresponding values of dependent variables, e.g., 
energy usage.  The accuracy of predictions of the dependent variables from values of 
independent variables from this data set is one of the criteria for judging this competition.
However, a more rigorous test is also planned.  Some of the dependent variable values will be 
withheld from each of the two data sets (this is explained in detail in the next section). 
"Withheld" means that you will be provided with a set of independent variables for which the 
corresponding values of dependent variables have been withheld by the organizers
[NOTE "For example you might be given a testing set consisting of weather and oc .   The data 
set from which the independent variables have been withheld are hereinafter called the 
"testing set" whereas the data that include both independent and dependent variable values are 
called the "training set." Although this nomenclature is common in some numerical approaches 
and not in others, it will provide an understandable nomenclature for this competition. The 
independent variable values in the testing set will  will be used by each participant to make 
their best predictions of the corresponding dependent variables.  The organizers will compare 
these predictions by each contestant with the true (data) values of the dependent variables 
that are known only to the organizers.  This second aspect of the competition is expected to 
be of considerable interest to the seminar audience.
Entries:  The competition will start on December 1, 1992 and will end on April 30,1993. 
Entries received after that date cannot be considered. The format for the entries, described 
in the following sections and in the entry form supplied on the data diskette must be followed 
exactly, or the entry will regretfully have to be rejected.
Results:  Following the close of the competition, the results will be analyzed and published. 
This will be in the form of the ASHRAE seminar (Denver, June, 1993) as described above.  The 
seminar co-chairs will not participate in the competition and but will be the sole analysts of 
the results.  The overall results will be presented at the seminar by the co-chairs followed 
by a presentation by each participant on their methodology.
The results to be produced by the competitors  are in the form of predictions of the dependent 
variables for the two testing sets of independent variables. These predictions will be 
submitted to the organizers who will evaluate them using the same methods for all submissions.  
Competitors will also conduct a self analysis of the accuracy of their prediction approach 
when applied to the training set.
The following criteria will be used by the organizers for assessing the respective accuracies 
of the entries when analyzing the testing set
	Coefficient of Variation ,CV:
	[EQN "CV  == [Root  [Sigma below [i=1] above n (y sub [pred,i] - y sub [dat
	Mean Bias Error, MBE:
	[EQN "MBE  == [  [Sigma below [i=1] above n (y sub [pred,i] - y sub [data,i
where


[EQN "y sub [data,i]"]   is a data value of the dependent variable corresponding to a 
particular set of values of the independent variables.
[EQN "y sub [pred,i] "]   is a predicted dependent variable value for the same set of 
independent variables above; these values are predictions by the entrants.
[EQN "y bar sub data"]   is the mean value of the dependent variable
	testing data set
	[EQN "n"]   is the number of sets of data in the testing set
Other statistics such as the correlation coefficient and maximum error may also be reported 
in a brief written summary assembled by the seminar co-chairs. Time permitting, graphical 
comparisons will be also prepared by the organizers. During each entrant's seminar 
presentation they may use any presentation of scientific value that they wish on the 
performance of their methods on the training set.
Prizes:  There are no prizes in the competition  (to prevent unnecessary disagreements).
Secrecy:  Because this is an open scientific study, entries that provide results without 
describing the methods used are not acceptable. On the other hand we recognize that a great 
deal of labor might have been applied to develop commercially useful applications and full 
details of those need not be revealed.  Sufficient information has to be supplied so that the 
results can in principle be independently verified. It is not necessary to submit practical 
implementation details or the computer code. However, we encourage sharing the software at 
the end of the competition. At a minimum, each participant should supply a flow chart of 
their methodology and the data plots described below.
Future Plans:   If interest warrants, it is planned that a computer server will operate after 
the close of the competition as a central repository of interesting data, analysis programs, 
and the results of other comparative studies.
1.3  Acquiring and Submitting Data
This section describes how to retrieve the data sets for the competition and how to submit 
competition entries.
The steps are: (1) read this section, (2) acquire the data, (3) analyze the data, and (4) 
send in your results in along with an entry form.
The data are available on disks (5.25-in size) in ASCII, IBM-PC format. To receive the data 
and other information, send a self-addressed 9 x 12 in. envelope with a $2.90 priority mail 
stamp affixed to:
	Building Energy Predictor Shootout
	Joint Center for Energy Management
	Campus Box 428


	University of Colorado
	Boulder, CO  80309-0428
Instructions on submitting a return disk with the analysis of the data will be included in 
a README file on the data disk.  The mailing will also include an entry form that each 
entrant will need to complete out and submit along with the results.



Completed entries (diskette with results plus completed entry form) should be mailed to: 
Energy Shootout Entry Disks at the above address. Part of the entry form will include your 
name and address and describe the machine type and density that your submittal disks were 
prepared with. The disks (either 3.5-in or 5.25-in. size of any density) must be in ASCII 
format readable by an MS-DOS machine.  Hard copy or nonconforming entries cannot be accepted.
1.4  Data Sets
There are two data sets provided; they are DOS-readable ASCII text files. The data sets have 
been chosen to address two different sorts of building-related data analysis problems. In 
this section we describe the general features of the data sets.
A.dat (approximately 3,000 points)
This is a time record of hourly chilled water, hot water and whole building electricity usage 
for a four-month period in an institutional building. Weather data and a time stamp are also 
included.  The hourly values of usage of these three energy forms is to be predicted for the 
two following months.  The testing set consists of the two months following the four-month 
period.
B.dat (approximately 2,400 points)
These data consist of solar radiation measurements made by four fixed devices to be used to 
predict the time-varying hourly beam radiation during a six-month period.  This four-
pyranometer device is used in an adaptive controller to predict building cooling loads.  A 
random sample of data from the full data set has been reserved as the training set of 1500 
points.  The value of beam radiation is to be predicted from data from four fixed sensors for 
the testing set of 900 additional points.
1.5  Submittals
The prediction tasks differ between the data sets (the sets were chosen to emphasize 
different prediction problems). The withheld testing data used for evaluating the predictions 
after the close of the competition will not be available to any of the entrants.
A.dat
For data set A submit predictions (i.e., forecasts) for chilled water, hot water and whole 
building electricity use for the two months following the four-month training set.  The 
testing set will include values of the same independent variables (weather, date and time) as 
the training set.  Submit your predictions of the three energy end uses in serial order by 
appending three columns containing your predictions to the right of the testing set columns 
provided on the disk data file.  You will therefore submit to the organizers the testing set 
plus three columns containing your predictions.  A sample of how you are to submit your data 
will be supplied with the data diskette.
The organizers will compare your predictions to the known values of the three energy uses and 
report CV and MBE.
You are also to prepare and submit with your diskette several graphs for the four-month 
training set data as shown in Figs. 1 and 2.  Figure 1 is a time series plot of actual data 
and a prediction along with the difference between the two (Fig. 1 is such a plot for one 
month; you can either prepare one such plot for each of the four months or just one plot  for 
all four months; you
will need to prepare at least on such plot for each of the three energy end uses).  Figure 2 
is a plot of hourly energy use vs. dry bulb temperature.  Data for all four months should be 
presented on one such graph for each of the three energy end uses (total of three plots will 
be prepared, one each for chilled water, hot water and whole building electricity).  On each 
graph show the values of CV  and MBE as defined above.
Summary:  You will submit to the seminar organizers one file on diskette with your 
predictions of the three energy end uses for the testing set.  You will also submit several 
graphs, just described, representing the accuracy of your prediction tool when used on the 
training set only.
B.dat
For data set B submit predictions for hourly beam radiation given four values of hourly 
fixed-sensor insolation for the testing set that has been randomly selected from the full 
data set.  The testing set will include the values of the same four independent variables 
(hourly insolation on four fixed surfaces) as the training set.  Submit your predictions of 
beam insolation in order by appending one column containing their values to the right of the 
four testing set columns provided on the disk data file.  You will therefore submit to the 
organizers the testing set plus one column containing your predictions. A sample of how you 
are to submit your data will be supplied with the data diskette.
The organizers will compare your predictions to the known values of the beam radiation in the 
testing set and report CV and MBE.
You are also to prepare and submit with your diskette one graph (often called a "scatterplot" 
or "crossplot") for the training set data as shown by the example in Fig. 3. Figure 3 is a 
plot of actual data (abscissa) and prediction (ordinate). You should prepare one such plot 
that includes all data in the training set. On this graph show the value of CV  and MBE as 
defined above.
Summary:  You will submit to the seminar organizers one file on diskette with your 
predictions for the testing set.  You will also submit a graph, just described, that 
represents the accuracy of your prediction tool when used on the training set only.
Questions about these instructions should be addressed to either of the organizers listed 
above.
1.6  Deadline and extensions
The competition ends at midnight on April 30, 1993; to be fair, we cannot accept entries 
after this time. We will allow two weeks after this deadline (until May 15th) for only the 
following two exceptions:
*  Because of computer difficulty you were unable to submit the data in
time. Send the data before May 15th, along with an explanation of the difficulty.  The 
organizers must be notified of your need to have this extension by April 30, 1993
*  You just found out about the competition or just received the data. Submit your 
entry before May 15th, along with an explanation why this extension is needed.
	[PB]
[WS	3.5 in]
Figure 1.  Example time series plot showing data, prediction and difference between the two.  
For the competition submittal also affix the values of CV and MBE to each graph.
[WS 3.5 in]
Figure 2.  Example plot showing energy consumption (here steam) plotted vs dry bulb 
temperature.  For the competition submittal also affix the values of CV and MBE to each 
graph.
[PB]
[WS 4 in]
Figure 3.  Example scatterplot showing data and prediction crossplotted.  For the competition 
submittal also affix the values of CV and MBE to each graph.
[SHOOTOUT.DOC] 
[PB
]
		[WS 1 in]


M E M O R A N D U M
TO:          Building Analyst Colleague
FROM:        Jan F. Kreider
SUBJECT:     Building Energy Predictor Shootout
DATE:        November 16, 1992
In order to facilitate comparisons among the many empirical techniques used to predict 
building demand and energy use and to foster contact among the relevant disciplines, 
ASHRAE's TC	4.7 and TC 1.5 have organized a building
data  analysis and prediction competition in the form of an ASHRAE seminar to be held in 
Denver in June, 1993. Forecasting or prediction using empirical models will be the goal of 
the competition.


Jeff Haberl and I invite you to participate.  The attached summary explains how you can enter 
this friendly, no-cost competition.  You have received this mailing because of the known 
interest of yourself and your colleagues in this area of building science research.  The 
enclosure should be self explanatory but donot hesitate to call me at the number above if you 
have questions.  Good luck!
Enclosure
			[SHOOTOUT.DOC]


For example you might be given a testing set consisting of weather and occupancy data (the independent 
variables) along with chilled water use (the dependent variable) for a four-month period.  For the fifth 
month you would only be given the weather and occupancy data but would be asked to predict the chilled water 
use based on the capability of y
our method developed with the four months of training data.
